hey folks Micah here we're about to get
started but before we do I just want to
remind you that you can always get show
notes for this and every other episode
at Christian
transhumanistpodcast.com and while
you're there be sure to sign up for
email updates so we can let you know
when new shows are released when new
things happen in the Christian
transhumanist Community and most
importantly so that we can connect you
with other people just like you
exploring questions just like this
thanks so much for listening enjoy the
show
Dr Redding and I'm here David Deutsch
who's an Oxford physicist a Pioneer in
the field of quantum Computing the
founder of Constructor Theory and the
author of some of my favorite books the
fabric of reality and the beginning of
infinity thanks so much David for
joining me today
you're welcome it's nice nice to talk to
you and uh that's nice that you like the
books I I love them and um I've I've
recommended them to to so many people
um over over the years and um yeah so
you know I was listening to your
interview with uh Sam Harris and he
started out with an apology
um and and so I think it would be
appropriate for me to apologize as well
because
um some of the stuff you deal with is so
um so deep and what I would say so
profound that
um it's just going to be impossible to
to do it justice and so I know some of
my listeners will be people who are you
know big fans of your your work
um and some will be new to it so to to
both of those uh you know I we won't be
able to really do
um all of your thought the the Justice
it deserves but I was thinking that
maybe the place that would be best for
us to start
is the the question of Humanity's place
in the cosmos because there's this idea
that
um that Humanity used to kind of think
of itself as the Pinnacle of of Creation
The Pinnacle of the universe and then
that science came along and kind of
dethroned us and now showed us that
we're a mediocre insignificant
um species on an insignificant planet
and an insignificant Galaxy
um what's your take on that concept
well uh as you know I comprehensively
reject that
um I should say I conclude
comprehensively that it's false uh I
don't uh sort of take that as an
axiomatic principle it's just that it
conflicts with what I think is our best
um
knowledge today
um both in the sense of physical effects
um and in the sense of theoretical
significance I suppose the physical
effects is aspect is the easier one to
explain it's it's just that as we learn
more and more about uh physics and
engineering and other Sciences we become
more and more able to escape from the
from the bounds that nature has imposed
we first Escape From The Great Rift
Valley and then we escape from from
being able to from from being obliged to
stay on the ground
and then we we escape from the our
planet and eventually we will escape
from our solar system and from our
galaxy and so on and so low in our
um parochial perspective
we have only been able to affect
a very tiny proportion of the physical
universe
our potential effect extends over the
whole physical universe and is very
profound because the kind of things
that happen in the physical world once
we get at them are radically different
and have no parallel in any effects that
any other kind of physical object can
have so that's the physical effect
now I think the
theoretical effect that the
philosophical uh significance of humans
is even more profound
um when it comes and and this is best
seen via Constructor Theory that's my
yeah um idea that that
um the laws of physics are are best
expressed in terms of what physical
Transformations are possible
or impossible impossible meaning
forbidden by laws of nature and possible
meaning uh permitted by laws of nature
and uh so if you think of the the set of
all conceivable tasks
um the ones that occur
without the intervention of let's say
living things
um at all are a very tiny subset of
those that can happen with living things
for example the chemical reactions that
occur without living intervention
inorganic chemistry is is a very tiny
set of reactions compared with organic
chemistry and and the same with
construction of physical objects like
nests and and bodies of animals and so
on
uh and and but then when it comes to uh
humans
the
type of physical transformation that can
be affected
um once there is explanatory knowledge
which is the
um the the signature type of knowledge
that only humans create
um that we know of
um then the that is uh again larger by
an astronomical factor that the the
number of
um uh
uh Transformations that is possible to
achieve given explanatory knowledge is
enormously larger and is
equal to the set of all transformations
that can be achieved by the laws of
physics so in that way in in two
different ways humans are aligned with
the physical universe as a physical
object and they also aligned with the
laws of the physical universe as laws
so there's uh there's something
counterintuitive about that because
you're saying that
um the the number of things that can
happen without
um without life and without
um intelligence is uh is in a sense
smaller than the things that can happen
with life or with intelligence yes tiny
and but I think most people would think
that's that's backwards that we are
small beings that you know we we don't
um we're not you know running a a sun in
our basement or something like that
right there are things happening out in
the universe that we're not doing
specifically
yes well as I said this is this is uh
largely a matter of uh perspective it's
because in our experience in the past we
haven't had that much effect we we have
we have only explored a tiny uh
proportion of our potential in this
regard but
as regards you know whether we have a an
artificial sun in our backyard uh in a
small way we soon will when we have
control abusion but uh the the the point
is that there is a fundamental
connection
built into the laws of physics between
understanding
and affecting
so in in principle
anything that we understand we can
affect to the largest extent that is
um permitted by the laws of physics
because the the you know the laws of
physics don't permit us to make
literally a star in our backyard because
it wouldn't fit and that's because of
various laws of nature but to make a
star out of interstellar hydrogen
is a task that's possible in principle
and there's no if someone wants to claim
that that's not
feasible to human beings that's not that
that transformation is not accessible to
human intentions should we want to do it
then they'd have an uphill struggle
because ultimately there's no way that
they can make that case without claiming
that there's a law of physics preventing
it
yeah so one way you've described this uh
before I think is that our special
relationship with the laws of physics
and
um and that's a really interesting
um
concept I want to come back to that and
kind of the concept of knowledge and so
forth but let's step back one thing that
you've talked about in in several
different contexts is
um the idea of that you know that we
actually don't live in kind of a normal
spot in the universe that our our place
in the universe is
um is a little bit unusual and that the
usual places in the universe or the
average places I suppose
um are are just completely completely
dark and completely empty uh as we would
normally perceive it is that is that an
accurate statement yes that's accurate
an accurate statement about
Intergalactic space and even
Interstellar space within the Galaxy
while not quite as dark as that is is
still
um uh very cold and and uh dark place
compared with what we're used to on the
other hand there is also the truth that
even
the best places on our planet for for
our evolution
which presumably the Great Rift Valley
in Africa was one is still extremely
hostile To Us by human standards you
know by by evolutionary standards uh
it's favorable to us in that it allowed
us to evolve and it didn't make us
extinct before we did evolve
um but that's that's um a very low
hurdle to Jump by human standards by
human standards
um people talk about spaceship earth
when they when they uh try and draw uh
make a metaphor for for how
Well Suited the world is to us but but
uh um spaceships would fail every
possible safety check if they were as
dangerous as the as the Great Rift
Valley where we evolve uh it it had
Vermin it had disease it had extremes of
of
um various kinds of weather which would
kill us and indeed it did Kill most of
us before our what we now regard as our
natural lifespan
and and so so you're saying okay that
that there is no environment that is
um
a particularly suitable for us quite so
that that that's right all the things
that that make it suitable for us
make it especially suitable for us have
been created by humans by way of first
generating explanatory knowledge and
then using that to affect the physical
world and therefore thereby change our
environment to make it more suitable
and so the the argument that you make is
that you know we've done this for uh for
ourselves in our history in on this
planet and that there's nothing in
principle that stops us from doing it in
an environment even as Extreme as
Intergalactic space
that's right
um we we take for granted the kind of
um changes that we've made on Earth that
for example make it possible for me to
be warm and have a pleasant conversation
here in Oxford England
on a an early spring day when the
temperature outside would definitely
kill me in a matter of hours if I didn't
have technology to protect me
so we we take that for granted we take
for granted that we can be Thrive and be
comfortable in environments which our
ancestors would have regarded as deadly
and which would have killed them in fact
and and similarly when we look to the
Future and and think what it's like what
it will be like to live on the moon or
Mars or on another solar system we kind
of view the environment there
as intrinsically hostile compared with
the Earth
but it isn't it's only unfamiliar the
the problem of living there is exactly
the same as the problem of living on
Earth it's a matter of
um using the opportunities that
knowledge and the laws of physics to
provide provide to automate the task of
making living comfortable and we've done
that many times on this planet we will
do it many more times on other planets
yeah and
um in your book you talk about this you
know what we would be able to do uh even
in the kind of you know this ultimate uh
blackest place in the universe that we
still have the resources we needed to
you given the appropriate knowledge to
create a habitable uh environment
um and I guess that that goes to
to what you're saying about our special
relationship with the laws of physics
you're saying that there is no there is
nothing in this universe there's no
place in this universe
um that is is in a sense beyond our
reach
um because of that relationship uh yes
it's nothing I I I did said I'm not sure
about the Interiors of quasars oh yeah
whether we could live there but yes
there's almost nothing beyond our reach
and what's more uh looking out the other
way around there is no other animal and
no other physical object in the universe
of which that is true
and okay so that that comes down to the
um a lot of what you talk about what is
it
um that gives us that unique
relationship what is special about that
relationship how is it that human beings
um are are special in this way when I
think so many people in the the
scientific world would say
um that itself is just a kind of a
biased
um anthropocentric viewpoint
yes well
um one has to look at the facts and what
gives us this
um uh ability is it all these different
possibilities we've been discussing come
through a single ability which is the
ability to generate explanatory
knowledge
that's kind of analogous if you want to
think of an analogy
uh to the fact that the all the
abilities of of
organisms the of living things on the
Earth
including us in our capacity as just
animals
come through a single capacity namely
the capacity to evolve knowledge in
genes in in DNA via A variation and
selection
so the uh all all the different
abilities of living things of flying and
of generating chemicals inside their
cells and and
um
uh harnessing nature in the way that
living things do all those come through
that one ability to generate
um dumb knowledge if you like and the
the kind of knowledge that is embodied
in genes and everything that is
distinctively human we have that as well
our species has that as well but it's
it's
um
it's not uh it it doesn't begin to
scratch the surface of what explanatory
knowledge makes possible that that makes
possible everything that is possible
even in principle to anything
so uh it's it's that single ability to
generate explanatory knowledge that is
responsible so you're you're saying that
there is a there is a kind of knowledge
that exists in genes and that there is a
kind of a higher order knowledge in some
sense that that exists uh uniquely in
humans that's right
so so that's that's interesting
um and this this is something that you
know I think maybe is is the hardest
kind of bit to to grasp
um you know in your books you talk a lot
about knowledge as kind of the the most
um essential you know feature of our
universe the most essential thing
um that we could know about our universe
um so how do you how do you explain what
knowledge is
um because you've you've talked about it
as as kind of a physical thing
it's it's physical uh yes although it
has properties that that
um transcend any particular physical
instantiation so the the kind of
knowledge that is passing back and forth
between you and me at the moment is is
being translated
um through through lots of different
physical objects which obey rather
different laws you know it's it's it's
um part of it's going in is encoded in
um moving electrical and magnetic fields
uh as it passes from one continent to
another and but it's also in sound waves
and it's also uh in in
electrochemical neuronic signals so
um
uh uh information is a is is a physical
thing
but uh you have to understand that it
obeys its own laws just like
um electricity and magnetism do I mean
all physical things are kind of unified
um now it knowledge is a special kind of
information it's information which can
be used to achieve physical
Transformations and which is necessary
to achieve most physical Transformations
that are possible
um and it is in a sense the most
important of physical phenomena because
to understand
um you know how Stars work you need you
need to understand nuclear physics and
gravity and and hydrodynamics and so on
and to understand how how
um fish work you need you need uh to
understand biochemistry and and so on
but the
the overwhelming majority of things that
are possible and that will happen
eventually to understand those things to
understand why those things happen you
have to understand knowledge
so knowledge is
the most needed uh
um an understanding of knowledge is the
most needed understanding to understand
what happens in the physical world
yeah I think I think you use the example
of
um of looking at a uh a star or
something like that and and that the
most important thing to know about that
star is whether there are intelligent
beings in the vicinity of it
uh yes I'm well if you that is for most
things you might want to ask yes so if
you want to ask will it go out soon
um you can answer well it won't go out
soon unless there are intelligent beings
there if there are intelligent beings
you have to understand a lot more about
it
yeah because you have to understand a
lot more about them to ask will they
want to switch off their star or to
interrupt it's like traveling to us or
not and that's a that's requires
completely different kind of Knowledge
from the knowledge that we currently
expect to Encompass everything that we
know about stars yeah yeah so so life
and and intelligence and knowledge are
really the the most important factors in
the universe
um in in the development of of um of how
star systems evolve of how even galaxies
evolve
um yes yeah so that is um that is
um both a huge concept and as as I've
already said you know very
counter-intuitive
um to to a lot of people
um can you talk about the concept of
um of universal reach and in the
beginning of infinity you kind of lay
out this this idea that there is there
is a difference between things that have
finite reach and there are things that
have infinite reach and um and I think
that's a pretty
um
an unusual concept for most people
because uh you know it comes up in
things like artificial intelligence you
know will we be forever kind of behind
intelligences and and you know all kinds
of different things
um but you kind of used an example of of
um
uh Roman numerals versus uh Place
notation uh as as a way to describe that
can you unpack that a little bit
yeah so
um
as you said
um when we solve problems and and create
explanatory knowledge usually uh the
knowledge extends as far as the problem
did if we're lucky I mean we may not
solve the problem but usually usually
the the good outcome is that the
knowledge extends as far as the problem
and then new problems will arise and we
have to generate new knowledge but
occasionally it has and this this was
the case with with number systems first
they had tallies where the number of
marks on a on a stick was equal to the
number of sheep and you could do certain
operations about about counting sheep
whether you have lost or gained someone
and so on and then better systems were
were invented like Roman numerals where
you didn't have to mark the rod a
hundred times to indicate a hundred
sheep
uh and uh eventually that evolved into a
number system which is as good as you
can get in that respect it's it's as
it's as efficient
a a way of representing sheep and any
other thing that numbers can be used for
it's as efficient as as can be achieved
using the laws of physics
so that's an example of
uh universality in a number system I I
think you're you're really asking about
the particular kind of universality that
human thought has is is that because
there are many kinds of universality one
important one is the universality of
computation the fact that one computer
can compute basically the same same
things as any other limited only by its
its speed and memory capacity but not in
its repertoire of computations but but
you're interested in human universality
is that right yeah yeah let's let's talk
about that because that's um that's
something you've you've described in in
all several different contexts this idea
of human universality
um and applied it to all kinds of
different questions and um
and yeah and I think what you're
suggesting is that
um not just that okay humans are are
this amazing thing but in some sense
that humans have have reached a point
um Beyond which there is in a sense no
further
um
ontological change I guess
there's no further change in in capacity
to to understand and control the world
yes
um again we we are we're at any
particular time like a computer we're
limited by the amount of Hardware that
we happen to have
but there's no limit to the amount we
can make
um if if we want to
um so uh the the this human versus
universality well that's the
universality in the
distinctively human ability that that
we're talking about just a moment ago
about the the ability to generate
explanatory knowledge
explanatory theories now there are
various ways I argue in the book against
all the possible ways that one might
think that there might be a fundamental
limitation on that uh and and uh I I
argue that they none of them make sense
or all of them are equivalent to just
arbitrarily limiting our knowledge with
with a supernatural edict
um the the uh so so
one of the arguments for example is
suppose there were a limit to how much
we can understand like
um
uh Martin Reese uh suggested that there
might be
aliens out there in in space somewhere
who are as far above us in their
capacity to think
not in their technology of course but in
in that that could be arbitrarily far
ahead of ours but in their capacity to
think as we are ahead of of uh
chimpanzees
and
um he seems to think that there's no
reason to think there aren't such beings
whereas I I think that the the
um
the the point is because of the
universality of computation which is
which is a lesser thing but which which
our brains are certainly have that
because they are computers and can
perform
ordinary computations as well because of
that
um and because
um computation is itself Universal in
that everything physical can be
described by computations we know that
from the laws of physics so all these
things come together because of those
two forms of universality anything that
the aliens can think can understand
we could could be represented as a
computer program and if it can be
represented as a computer program then
it can be represented as a thought as
well a human thought if necessary by
augmenting
um human brains with with additional
memory
which will no doubt be done for many
other reasons very soon and in fact
to all intents and purposes it has
already been done and has been done
for Millennia already because when when
the first person invented writing
they were already augmenting the
hardware of the human brain the its
memory capacity and also it's
um
computational capacity and so uh when
when people throw up their hands at the
idea of you know augmenting human brain
with computers
um uh they they are simply and and
saying that such a thing wouldn't be
human anymore
um they are simply making the same
mistake as thinking that you're not
really human if you use a pencil and
paper to do your calculations
yeah so so you're saying you're saying
that you know the the fundamental limits
that we might face which are kind of
memory and
um and computational capacity are
already things that we have
um we have work to overcome and that yes
that's ultimately you know that that's
what technology uh at least Information
Technology does for us it extends uh our
brains in that way or the the ability of
our our brains and and you're saying
that because uh we know we know that our
brains
um
are at least
um what a computer is that we then know
that everything that's possible in the
universe every concept that's that's
possible in the universe
um can be modeled in our own brains
that is correct
so that is um yeah that that I think is
um
a lot to to swallow for for a lot of
people but but how do we you know how do
we know something like this how do we
know that our our brains are computers
or that they have those kinds of
um functionality
uh
so as I said that that is a conclusion
not not an axiom not a premise and it's
a conclusion from our best knowledge so
in that particular case it's because of
the universality of computation in the
sense that we know that any physical
process can be
um modeled with arbitrary accuracy by a
computer the reason we know that is
because we we know what what the
uh the the
fundamental language in which the laws
of physics are expressed is
uh namely the laws of quantum mechanics
and relativity they they underlie all
the other laws of nature that that we
know now from from
um relativity doesn't really enter into
it but quantum mechanics imposes
uh constraints on what can be computed
and they are really responsible for the
laws of computation and I proved back in
1980s that that
um a universal quantum computer would be
able to compute
um anything that any other physical
object can compute
and that includes aliens yeah
of course we don't uh no one can prove
that the laws of physics are quantum
mechanical it's just our best theory as
unrivaled at present there's no rival
Theory
um
but then we're not in the business of
proving things but it the science
proceeds by trying to explain things and
that is the best explanation that we
have
yeah so I think maybe this is um I want
to jump into your kind of analysis of of
History a little bit
um because
um like you've already said you you
think that we emerged in a uh
environment that was essentially hostile
to us
um that that we were able to kind of
leave that environment due to gaining
knowledge
um
to improve it and then to leave it and
then to improve the environments we
found and so on
[Music]
um but you at the same time you would
say that
um for the vast majority of human
history we were making almost no
progress
um until until something changed
yes well we were making
um
almost no progress in in two senses one
is that it was sporadic and and it was
sort of two steps forward two steps back
quite a lot of the time and and the
other way is that it was extremely slow
the the rate at which uh knowledge was
being generated
uh was uh was very slow compared with a
human lifetime and therefore
a typical human would never see any
increase in knowledge in their lifetime
for most of human history and that only
stopped being true a few hundred years
ago it's somewhat but you know with the
Scientific Revolution but I think the
real key change was was a bigger thing
namely the enlightenment
so yeah yeah so what is it about uh the
enlightenment or the Scientific
Revolution like what what changed then
that that allowed
um all this stuff to start happening
well there are a number of different
ways of of expressing what
changed
um Carl popper says that what is needed
uh for the progress is a tradition of
criticism
which uh which is kind of sounds like a
contradiction at first because because
the tradition means a way of keeping
things the same and criticism means a
way of changing things but if you think
of it as being a tradition of criticism
then that's a thing which if you can
achieve it
it stabilizes the changes and then you
can have
um the the growth of knowledge now I
have said What specifically
happened there
to to if you like at the psychological
level or at the level of individual
Minds to create to to
uh to implement a tradition of criticism
to to to to to to
um make the conditions for a condition
for a tradition of criticism to happen
is that people started looking for what
I call good explanations
um whereby good I mean that they they
are hard to change while still
accounting for the things they purport
to explain uh so the people have always
looked for explanations
and they've sometimes found them and
often they've been fools but what they
haven't been able to do is
systematically improve them
and once you look for good explanations
which is explanations that are hard to
vary
while still accounting for for what
they've purport to account for and and
that means that they are they engage
with the conditions of the problem that
they're trying to solve uh once once
they once you're looking for that then
you can you can make
progress that builds on previous
progress
so
is there is there anything so this idea
that um explanations that are hard to
vary
um you know I I think that I I resonate
with that
um and maybe have instinctively I I've
had a kind of motto that that uh for
myself that that truth is the thing that
you can't shake once you
um once you've grasp it grasped it or
something and and so that seems to be
similar to what you're saying right that
this is a very particular like it's an
explanation that's very particular
um yes
so yeah any kind of variation breaks it
yes although that there there are other
ways of stabilizing ideas uh irrational
ways
um so uh but but yes if if the if your
ideas are stabilized by their engagement
with the problem
then that's a good explanation by the
way even being a good explanation
doesn't guarantee truth
we can be mistaken with good
explanations but if if we continue
seeking them we will encounter problems
with even our best explanations
and can then improve on them
so you're saying that that for whatever
reason something happened
um in during the Enlightenment or during
the Scientific Revolution which which
um kicked off this this
um culture of uh looking for good
explanations and and then uh a tradition
of criticism around those good
explanations yes and that that itself
that process itself is then the thing
that um that means you know we can we
can just keep going from here uh to to
Infinity basically that's right uh I
think we've passed the threshold we've
we've passed the jump to universality
and that's a I mean that's a pretty
um big idea that that you know some year
in the last you know few hundred years
was essentially like the first year in
the history of the universe perhaps
um in which this stuff became possible
and but but now it is that's that's not
quite right I think uh uh because
there's no guarantee that we will just
because we can okay there's no guarantee
that we will that there's no limit
there's also no limit to the size of the
error that humans can make and it's
conceivable that we we will we will end
the enlightenment or even that we'll
wipe ourselves out
uh like like most species uh have done
we unlike any other species we are
capable of not wiping ourselves out but
that's only capable and
um I speculate in in uh in my second
book
um the beginning of infinity that that
um
uh many attempts to form a tradition of
criticism occurred during history
uh I I I suggest ancient Athens and and
Renaissance Florence as two examples
um uh and but but I think there may have
been many more and all of them were
wiped out within a couple of generations
uh ours the the thing we call the
enlightenment or the thing that we call
Western Civilization or or whatever you
call it
um has definitely been the longest lived
of those and the most widespread
um so
um but that's I think all we can say
that there's no
there's no although there is a a
fundamental feature of the laws of
physics that says we can continue doing
this forever there's no law that says
that we will right right so so that gets
to the question so we've we talk about
history let's talk about the future what
is
um what is what is the the way for us to
um kind of ensure our future how do we
move into the future
um deal with you know some of the big
um things that we're dealing with uh you
know from from climate change to uh to
artificial intelligence to you know what
whatever might uh come up how do we kind
of best guarantee and if there's no
guarantees but how do we best kind of
ensure that we
um that we keep moving that we keep
progressing
yes
um so I I think that the
um
the key thing
is to carry on generating knowledge as
fast as possible
um the Winston Churchill said uh If
You're Going Through Hell keep going we
we are bound to encounter problems we
are bound to encounter large problems
and we're bound to encounter
unforeseeable problems so that's that's
all going to happen for sure
the Temptation for some people is to
reign in
research uh progress of all kinds
technological scientific
um even moral knowledge to to Reign it
in uh
for fear of the unintended consequences
of making mistakes but this is this is a
terrible idea because
um
uh that there is no way of avoiding
mistakes there is the universe doesn't
provide that the Universe only provides
a means of solving problems not
preventing them from happening and
especially unforeseen problems and in
the case of the problems that are caused
by
mistakes in general human mistakes
I mean some because by nature some will
be caused by human mistakes and
especially those that are caused by
human moral mistakes I.E malevolence
uh we have to take into account the fact
that malevolent humans
have creativity at their disposal as
well they too can generate explanatory
knowledge and so how do we make sure
that the good guys continue to defeat
the bad guys forever
[Music]
um well
I think that the good guys although we
are we are the same good guys are the
same as the bad guys in regard to
capacity
uh inherent capacity there is one
advantage that good has over evil which
is that uh as I said at a debate
recently um uh the the bad guys are
wrong
and
the enemies of civilization are wrong
and therefore they unlike the good guys
have an inherent interest in preventing
their ideas from changing and that's why
they are in they are always worse at
generating knowledge than than the the
good guys if we try to reign in our
knowledge creation because of fear of of
uh the the effects of technology or
whatever then we are destroying our only
advantage
um quite apart from it being useless
anyway because because problems are
inevitable but it it for those specific
kind of problems it's exceptionally
perverse to try to limit the growth of
knowledge
um so we uh this is this is
um
um and therefore also
we must get used to jarring changes
um they they will happen faster and
faster
um
so so long as we we keep the tradition
of criticism
um alive we don't we don't know what
even that will look like
in the distant future you know at the
moment we have various traditions of
criticism like
uh liberal democracy in politics and and
um uh and
capitalism in economics and and
um uh peer review in science and that we
have those institutions the particular
institutions are not going to survive
forever
but uh the property of being a tradition
of criticism has to survive or we're
doomed hmm yeah so you you apply this
the same thinking to to the Democratic
process which is interesting so uh
explain that a little bit how does how
does that make sense you know how is
um
democracy like this process of of
knowledge generation that occurs in
science or rationality
yes so uh this this idea I I more or
less
um uh repeated directly from uh Carl
Poppa
um uh his theory of politics is is
essentially the same as his theory of
the growth and knowledge in science that
the idea is that political policies are
theories they are their ideas which
there is no guarantee that they'll be
right on or uh that they'll be true and
and we must assume
that they are not true and will cause
um problems which unless they are solved
will
end the the political culture in
question
so we uh in
politics just like in science we need a
tradition of criticism and it has the
same
it has the same uh paradoxical and yet
possible feature that that it does in
science that that uh for most of human
history
um those two things never went together
a tradition and criticism never went
together but after the enlightenment
they did we have Traditions which
stabilize change again uh seemed like a
contradiction in terms but but uh they
uh we we our political institutions
stabilize change now this has some
implications for
uh how actual institutions like like
voting systems and and legislatures and
uh and so on are arranged because people
still haven't learned the lesson of Carl
Poppa
uh in that they still they still want to
judge political systems by the same
Criterion that they would judge a
particular policy
uh that's obviously fatal for for the
possibility of change
um so improvements so that they they
they want to to make a system that is
most likely to make the right choice for
example
uh to make the right policy to elect the
Right leader and so on in in proper
scheme of things
uh you simply take for granted that no
system can do it do that you take for
granted that there will always be bad
policies uh bad institutions bad leaders
and the real problem is how to re how to
make a society that can change those
things easily as easily as possible but
without the society itself being
destroyed and so he would judge
um a political institution
um a voting system that's going to be
always by a single Criterion
does it make it more or less easy to
remove bad leaders and bad policies
without violence or the threat of
violence so that's the uh and and we we
again we kind of take for granted that
in our system
in the western political systems all of
them
um
a politician uh a leader you may have
been in power for several years has has
been used to everyone doing what he says
uh and and he's sure that
the Rival Leaders with their bad
policies will ruin the country
or even the world you know and and then
they lose an election
and despite still thinking that the the
Rival policy is bad they quietly leave
office
not only do they quietly leave office
and shake hands with the new leader
they would fight and die
to make sure that that leader and not
themselves stays in power
that's that's an amazing thing that we
have achieved it's been achieved very
very rarely in history and when it has
been achieved it's been soon destroyed
wow well but it's very precious
huh yeah that's
um that's that's really interesting
um yeah that that is true where the the
handoff of power is is in the sense more
important than the power itself yes much
more
um let's let's talk about uh one one
thing that that kind of connects to our
earlier discussions you you wrote an
article
um a while back
um in which you argued that AI is a
philosophical problem I don't know if
I'm characterizing that correctly but
yeah
um but we're talking about you know of
course the world is full of artificial
intelligence of various kinds but but
you're talking about artificial general
intelligence and intelligence like our
own
um yes and you're you're suggesting that
um contrary to what some people might
think we're not going to get there just
by kind of cranking up the the clock
speed
um over time that's right or even by
making better algorithms of the kind
that search engines have and and uh game
playing programs have the thing is that
intelligence that's as I think you said
like ours intelligence it's like ours
according to me that that means that it
has the property of being able to create
new explanations that's that's our
distinctive feature uh I I I I think I I
called it a distinctively human feature
but that even that's not General enough
um because it might it might exist in
Aliens as well and and eventually it
will exist in artificial intelligences
as well and
the my general term for the things that
have this ability is people so uh the
only people we know of at the moment are
humans
but um one day we will make artificial
people who will have this ability as
well and they will be fully human in
every sense automatically as well just
by having that ability because it's
Universal
uh and the same with aliens if they have
that you either do or don't have that
ability more or less we can talk about
the dividing line if you like
um that uh so uh I the the all the
existing programs that are called AI
are not capable of generating any new
explanations
they they are and the way the easiest
way to see that is by seeing that you
can you can uh
write a program
to determine whether the whether a
particular other program has the ability
inquired for example in question for
example
if somebody purports to have a program
that plays good chess then you can have
a Criterion in another computer program
for whether it plays good chess but you
can't have a it's intrinsically
impossible to have a Criterion
uh to to implement in a computer program
a Criterion for whether somebody has
generated a new scientific explanation
because to have that Criterion you'd
first have to have to have the
explanation and therefore it wouldn't be
new
so why is it
um
what's the difficulty in I mean just to
put this kind of
um simplistically what's the difficulty
in just sitting down and writing the
algorithm that's going to create yes um
that new knowledge or whatever for this
for the same reason
um every other computer program that we
write
um before we write the algorithm we know
what property the algorithm is going to
have like what what uh what what the
desired output is for a given input
um for for a explanation generator we
precisely can't do that because we don't
know what the new explanation is before
we have it
so the the uh the task is different
what is needed to
um achieve that I don't know we only
know from the very nature of
universality that there exists such a
computer program
but we don't know how to
um to write it and unfortunately because
of the prevalence of
wrong theories of the mind and of humans
and of explanation and of uh theory of
knowledge and so on uh all
existing programs to to program all
existing uh projects to
try to solve this problem uh in my view
doomed because just because they're
using it's not because they're not using
the right philosophies because they're
using the wrong philosophy yeah we have
to stop using the wrong philosophy and
then use the right philosophy which I
don't know what it is
that's the difficulty
so so you're you're saying as well that
that there you know that this this
process that exists in our our brains
um and that makes us persons
um is something we completely don't
understand we don't understand how it
works we know it's there we know it it
it can be implemented in a computer but
we don't know what it actually is yes we
know some things about it like you said
we know that it can be implemented in
the computer we know some of the laws of
epistemology
um but but yes we don't know how
specifically uh human type personal type
creativity works yeah well and so
I'm just curious
um you kind of mentioned that dividing
line does that does that change your
notion of
um personhood from maybe a more
traditional notion
um as to who yes so personhood is a
property of a program
it's a property of of a computer program
or a brain program or whatever
therefore it's slightly misses the point
to ask things like
our chimpanzees
human or are they almost human or do
they have human type doing do they have
person type characteristics because it's
not the chimpanzee that would have them
just like it's not the human body the
human brain that has them it's the
program in the brain so it's not
inconceivable that a chimpanzee brain
could in principle be programmed with a
person program it's just that the
standard interface as it were for a
chimpanzee brain
doesn't make that easy in fact it
apparently it makes it very difficult
people people have tried
to instill human culture
uh into Apes by doing the same thing
that we would do to humans whether we do
to humans to give them human culture and
it hasn't worked
so uh it it hasn't created anything
capable of creating any explanation any
new explanation that's not to say it's
impossible and if it's not possible by
uh you know the conventional methods of
bringing up
children and and so on then then it may
be May and presumably is possible by by
nanosurgery by actually changing the
computer program in a chimpanzees brain
uh it has
uh
smaller capacity than a human brain but
I don't think that would make the
difference because the capacity of the
human brain
um you know has to
has to last for a hundred years or so
and and there are people who reach the
age of 100 without being intellectually
impaired and so uh chimpanzees brain is
is is uh a reasonable fraction of ours
so maybe it would it would
um reach its physical limits sooner than
ours maybe it would reach them in 10
years or in five years in which case it
would probably be
immoral to insert this program into a
chimpanzees brain but
uh so the these speculations though
don't really matter from the point of
view of the question that people want to
ask namely
is it really true that chimpanzees
and other animals all other animals are
qualitatively different from us they are
in the program that they currently have
or that it's currently feasible to put
in them by reasonable means definitely
has no such ability
[Music]
and if I'm if I'm not
um extrapolating too far some people
um you know a different kind of points
in history
um try to make a
try to make claims about qualitative
differences between the brains of of
people of different races but you would
say that that's actually that kind of
difference whatever there might be is is
irrelevant because the real question is
this essentially the software this
cultural software that we have yes it's
it's strictly irrelevant it's it's uh
um the universality trumps
um any such differences it's it's rather
like imagining that um a game playing
laptop
um couldn't run a word processor or even
more it's it's it's it's it's like it's
like imagining that somebody could write
a word processor on which you could only
type right wing articles and not left
it's it's it's that much of a
misconception yeah
um well I I I
um there was one one other thing that I
I wanted to I mean there's so much so
much that I want to explore
um I I would like to ask you and and
um I don't know how how deep of a of a
kind of uh well this would be so we can
we can pass this by if you if you like
but we've we've talked um we've talked
on this program
about
um the Omega Point Theory and um and you
have a kind of a uh complicated
relationship with that but I think
that's that's uh you talked about that
in um in your book I think the fabric of
reality
um and things have got more complicated
yeah they have um and but but at the
time you made a kind of Defense of it as
a as a kind of plausibility from the
from the physical standpoint uh I I
would say hasten to say not the
theological standpoint but the physical
standpoint yes um can you just you know
describe for me kind of what you're
feeling about that is now or how how
your thought process is the the the the
the question that this is uh addressing
really is
this this open-ended this universality
of the of The Human Condition
um can it be extended to a literal
Infinity
um so that there that literally will
never come to an end and will always
continue to uh improve or is there some
finite limit imposed by the nature of
cosmology
um and uh it used to be thought that
that cosmology must come to an end
essentially either because the universe
will recollapse after Big Bang or
because it will continue to expand until
the matter is so sparse
um that
um that computations can't be performed
anymore tippler showed
that in in a particular cosmology that
he called the Omega Point cosmology
um which recollapse although it
recollapsed an infinite amount of
computation can literally infinite
amount will be eventually performed
before the end of the collapse so that
subjectively
um people will be well people will be
objectively thinking faster and faster
Without Limits and and subjectively they
can continue thinking forever now that
particular cosmology although at the
time it was uh quite plausible
uh is now believed by most technology by
most cosmologists
to be
um uh contrary to experiment
um it is now that the best theory now is
that the universe will in fact expand
forever and that this is caused by a
thing called dark energy which we
completely do not understand
uh so we've gone from cosmology that's
understood that was understood well
enough
to be able to say that the Omega Point
cosmology of Tippler
is possible and in in my view was very
plausible
to saying that our best guess
is that that cosmology isn't possible
but also that we don't understand we
understand it much less now than we did
before
it's a wonderful thing about science
that we can make progress
by realizing that we don't understand
something as well as by realizing that
we do
um so there have been suggestions that
that India in the um
in the dark energy cosmology if that is
really is true
um that uh
uh that we could
um achieve an infinite amount of
computation anyway
uh by going slower and slower and using
the very dark energy that's expanding
the universe to drive computation
so again things would go slower and
slower but only at such a rate that the
total amount
is still infinite
so uh
so that that's a possibility but but we
I think anyone who
pontificates about whether that's really
true or not it isn't really up to date
with with the controversy but um so we
don't know about cosmology at the moment
yeah
I don't think it matters for practical
purposes because the the amount of
knowledge we're talking about
is way way past the limit of being
comprehensible to us at present
um you know we
uh
words fail me I mean it's so far beyond
any conceivable planning Horizon yeah
that uh it doesn't make any difference
whether you think that that um the
growth of knowledge will never end or
whether you think that it will only end
in 10 to the 10 to the 10 years
right right we can we can still plan our
uh plan our vacation and and so forth we
don't have to
um without without expecting to run up
against any limits yeah
um do you you know I think tippler has
has more recently suggested that
um that persons could engineer the
collapse of of the universe if we so
desired yes that's that's that's also a
possibility in some cosmologies yes
so
um so okay so that might be that might
be possible
um we just don't know and
um and at any rate those kinds of even
potential limits are so far removed from
our potential as as knowledge generating
beings uh yes as to be uh just for all
for all intents and purposes we have uh
infinite reach that extends across the
entire
um entirety of of existence as we know
it in a sense yes correct
all right well that's uh that's a great
place to uh to stop I I would love to uh
talk um you know I I would love to go
into you know your take on on morality
and and so many you know so many other
things here but
um but I think that's that's probably uh
enough uh blown Minds for today so
um but uh is there a good place where
people can kind of keep up with
um you know your most recent
Publications or your most recent work
I'll put links to books in the show
notes but anything else you'd like to
link to or oh yeah that's my website I
suppose because everything else that's
connected with me is linked from there
so uh
David deutsch.org.uk I think it is okay
um
uh and
um yeah there's also the construct
Theory website but but that my website
links to everything including my Twitter
feed okay okay well I'll yeah I'll put
links to that definitely and uh links to
the books which I definitely will
recommend to everyone
um but uh thanks David so much for uh
for having this conversation and
hopefully we can uh reconnect sometime
in the future very nice and very
interesting talking to you all right
we'll see you later bye bye